---
title: MPF Road Map, Vision & Future
---

# MPF Road Map, Vision & Future


To set the stage for our vision for the future of MPF, we'd like to
start by saying that we love "traditional" pinball where you hit knock
a physical ball into real targets.

While there's lots of talk about alternate concepts like Pinball 2000
and the Multimorphic P^3 (which replaces the bottom [2/3rds of the
playfield with an
LCD](http://www.multimorphic.com/index.php/p3-pinball-platform)), our
vision is focused on traditional-style pinball machines.

That said, we believe there is quite a bit of room for innovation even
within the boundaries of classic pinball. For example:

## Internet-connected pinball machines that report their own outages & problems

One of the problems with pinball on location today is that the machines
often break. Unfortunately since most of these machines are owned by
route operators, if a pinball machine in a bar breaks then the bartender
just turns it off and the route operator has no idea that it's not
earning. So if the operator is stopping by once a week to check on a
machine, it might break an hour after he leaves and then be dark (and
not earning) for the next 6 1/2 days until he comes back again.

We believe that pinball machines should be able to use the internet to
report their current status. The operator should be able to log into a
web portal to see all his machines and to view the current status. He
should get text messages or iOS alerts with details of the "credit dot."

Furthermore, the ultimate indicator of whether a machine is working or
not is whether it's earning. If a pinball machine only earns \$20 a
week, it's literally not worth an operator's time to drive to the
location to check on it. So if he can see a report that the machine is
earning as expected, he wouldn't have to waste his time and gas driving
around to all his locations to check on his machines.

We can also be proactive when machines are turned off. The operator
ought to be able to configure a schedule which basically says, "This
machine should be powered on from noon until 2am every day," so if the
cloud service ever loses connectivity with a machine during those hours,
it can notify the operator (and maybe the location owner) that the
machine is offline when it should be on, and the operator can make a
phone call to see if the machine is ok before heading out. (And, if the
machine is not ok, the operator can know that he's going out to the
location for a reason.)

Of course their are plenty of times when a machine is powered on with no
credit dot, but where the machine might still not be playable. (Maybe
there's a stuck ball or a broken rubber.) In those cases we can go back
to the earnings reports. If a machine is typically earning 5 dollars per
day but half a day goes by without any money inserted, the machine can
alert the operator that there's a problem.

## Dynamic Pricing

Another cool thing about an internet-connected pinball machine is that
operator settings can be centrally "pushed" to the machine. If a bar is
rented out for a private party, the bar tender ought to be able to fire
up an app on his or her smart phone to instantly set all the machines to
free play. Or maybe there's an automatic schedule. "Wednesday night is
free pinball," or "All pinball is free from 4-7pm." The operator ought
to be able to set up a schedule and the machines should be able to
change their pricing automatically based on the time of day.

We could even imagine "demand pricing," where the price is automatically
adjusted up or down based on demand for a particular machine.

## Player "Log in" for notification of high scores being beat

We love the idea of players being able to "log in" to a machine, most
likely by "tapping in" to the machine with their Bluetooth or
NFC-enabled smart phone. (This idea is not new of course. Pyprocgame
creator Adam Preble [blogged about this in
2014](http://adampreble.net/blog/2014/02/ibeacon-at-the-arcade/), and
Dutch Pinball's Bride of Pin\*Bot 2.0 and Big Lebowski have "Player
Profiles" features.)

Regardless of how it's implemented, we love the idea of a particular
player being able to login to a machine, since there are several cool
things this could enable, including:

* Notification of high scores being beat. How cool would it be if you
    could get a text message or iOS notification when you lost your high
    score spot on your favorite machine?
* Accomplishments tracking. I would love to know what my high score
    was on different machines, or for a mobile app to tell me, "That's
    the most combos you've ever completed in Attack from Mars."
* Player preference settings. Most pinball machine settings are geared
    towards operators (number of balls per game, difficulty, etc.), but
    modern machines have plenty of options that don't matter to
    operators that hard core players are very passionate about. A
    pinball machine's app should allow players to set their own white
    balance for RGB LEDs (cool versus warm white), or the overall
    brightness of the LEDs, or even whether the LEDs "pop" on-and-off
    instantly or gently fade up and down like traditional incandescent
    bulbs. Players should be able set these preferences on their own or
    save their to their profile which they can have applied to whatever
    machine they walk up to.

All of this could be done on a per-player basis, with the machine taking
on a different look and feel as each player steps up. Players could even
set their color preferences with RGB LEDs in the apron lighting to
indicate which player is up.

## Mobile phone companion apps

We've already [demonstrated a
feature](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0HouBZHx2uQ) of the Mission
Pinball Framework where we use an iPhone app as a "second screen" for a
pinball machine. We can imagine players being able to customize their
iOS app to show whatever data they want---score, ball, shots lit,
etc.---which they can then set on the glass near the flippers. The
machine could also send all DMD information and animations to that
device and the player wouldn't have to take their eyes off the flipper
area.

The mobile app could have a "helper" mode where it knows exactly
what's going on in the game and can tell you want to shoot for---kind
of like if you had a world-class player standing over your shoulder and
telling you want to do.

The mobile app could also let you know when it's your turn (in case you
walked away from the machine), or when a certain machine you're waiting
in line for is free. (Maybe you even pay for and "reserve" your place
in line from your phone?)

It could also let you see all sorts of statistics for your game when
while another player is playing (balls locks, goals remaining, etc.).

You'd also be able to collect very detailed metrics and analytics about
your games. (Average time to hit a hurry-up, average ball time, number
of shots, etc.) That could also be shared in a web-based dashboard and
player ranking system.

## Mobile phone audio integration

One of the things that stinks about playing pinball in a loud bar is
that you can't hear the machines. Some machines have headphone jacks,
but that's a separate piece of hardware.

What if you could pair your phone to the machine, and then the machine
could stream its audio to your phone which you could listen to via
headphones? You could even allow multiple people standing around to
connect their audio to the same machine?

Another option is if you pair your phone with a machine, you could play
a playlist from your phone instead of the machine's music. The pinball
machine could still add the voice call outs and sound effects, but just
with your music. (This could be done via headphones or even through the
pinball machine's speakers.)

The machine could even have a mobile app which lists all the various
music cues (waiting to plunge, base mode background, wizard mode
background, etc.) and you could map those to individual tracks from your
phone. Then whenever you walk up to a machine, you get your own custom
music! (This could integrate with a cloud-based music service like
Spotify or Apple Music and be configurable via the web so you get your
own music any time you play that machine.)

## Mobile phone "waiting player" actions

Traditional multi-player pinball machines alternate between players,
with the non-playing players just watching the current player that's
up. The games themselves are very much about the "player versus the
machine" more so than the "player versus player."

But what if the waiting player could use their phone to mess with the
current player who's up? Maybe they have buttons that could temporarily
shut off the flippers, or pop up drop targets which block shots, or
release extra balls into play, or turn off all the lights...

These could be things that are granted to each player (you get one of
each per game), or they could be earned by players for accomplishing
certain achievements during the game.

## Social media integration

Like it or not, people love posting random stupid things to social
media, and their latest accomplishments on some pinball machine in a bar
fit nicely into that. We can imagine a pinball machine tweeting high
scores and jackpots made, perhaps even with a tiny camera in the top of
the backbox which sends photos winning (and losing) moments to the
players.

Most locations that have pinball machines also have social media
accounts, and they struggle with ways to get their customers to
"connect" with them. An internet-connected pinball machine could be part
of that. Maybe they give players a free game (which they can redeem by
tapping in with their phone) if the player lets the pinball machine
tweet a photo of them winning.

## "Offline" goals

An internet and social media connected pinball machine can also keep the
relationship with the player going even when they're not at the machine.
Maybe a player has to play a Facebook game or engage with a brand to
"unlock" certain features of the game. Or maybe that's reversed, where
people who play massive online games have to seek out a real world
pinball machine to unlock certain goals in their online game.

## Promos & advertising

We briefly mentioned the concept that locations could change their
machines' pricing around special events and for happy hours. But why
stop there? What if an advertiser, desperate to reach the 18-to-35 year
old male, could buy their potential customers a free round of pinball?
Imagine that tied to location services with the pinball players' app.
You walk by a bar and your phone buzzes and it says "Lexus would like to
buy you a free pinball game if you walk into this bar in the next 10
minutes." (Of course this is something that the bar could do too. Come
in now and get a free game of pinball with every pint you buy.)

We could also imagine in-game advertising, maybe between balls or even
integrated within the game. (Maybe a game has multiple pricing tiers,
with the 25-cent game add supported while the 75-cent game remains
"pure.")

Pinball only costs 75 cents or a dollar to play, and there are many
types of advertising today where the advertisers pay far more than a
dollar per impression. A pinball ad network could charge the advertiser
one dollar per game, and the location and operator would make the same
money they always did, the ad network could take their cut, and there
would still be enough left over to increase the revenue a pinball
machine could generate overall.

## In-app purchases for game credits and power-ups

Even in 2014, we notice a lot of our friends saying, "I don't have any
quarters," as an excuse not to play pinball. What if you could buy
credits via an in-app purchase? There could be options for credits that
expire, credits that are only good for one machine or one bar, bulk
pricing discounts, and even credits that never expire. You could even
structure it like a public transit card where a player's credits are
automatically topped up when the balance gets low.

This could be used for much more than just credits. Players could buy
options like extra balls, longer ball saves, tilt forgiveness, and other
in-game goals all from their phones. The machines could keep track of
which games used which options (important for keeping fair high scores),
and the additional revenue could be shared with the location and
operators.

## Buh-bye four-button service menus!

It probably goes without saying that the four-button
tap-tap-tap-tap-tap-tap-enter-tap-tap-tap service menu is going to be
history. Every pinball machine moving forward should have a mobile app
for operators that lets them configure settings and few reports and
audits in an easy-to-use interface on the mobile device.

Even if they're not sitting at their machine, operators should be able
to connect to a website to see all their machines, view Google
Analytics-style earnings reports, remotely update software, push out
configuration settings, and manage all aspects of the machine. Leaning
down behind a coin door to configure things is almost laughable for a
new machine in today's world!

## Advanced tournament options

One of the problems with tournaments today is that if a machine
malfunctions, it can break the current game in progress which isn't
really fair to the current players.

What if the machine could maintain a sort of "transaction log" of
everything that happened, so if a machine malfunctions, the tournament
operator could hit a button to pause the machine, reset the ball or fix
the problem, roll back the errant entries, and resume the game?

You'd also be able to integrate the actual machine scores and players
with the tournament system. Super Selfie Leagues could automatically
post scores and notify players when their scores have been beat or when
they move down on the leaderboard.

## Accelerometer integration

Modern machines with accelerometers can use them to track g-forces as
well as to know the precise angle (in 3 axes) of the machine.

This means that the machine could notify the operator if the machine was
not level. And when you were leveling the machine, it should show you
that level on the display, or even read it out with text-to-speech as
you were underneath the machine adjusting the legs.

The machine could also record the playfield angle for high scores
(especially those posted online, maybe along with tilt sensitivity and
outlane settings) to start to get a more universal baseline to high
scores. (Though it still wouldn't be perfect due to wear, playfield
wax, etc.)

The machine would also know if someone was lifting up the front of the
machine (even slightly), which could make for some funny callouts. Maybe
the points start draining until the player sets the machine down again.

You could even have a machine that can apply scoring multipliers based
on the angle. (And maybe even have a machine where you can set the angle
and scoring on your own?) Imagine "My high score on Ghostbusters is
200M at 6.5 degrees, but only 25M at 7 degrees."

## More ideas from Jon Norris

Since we first wrote down our vision, someone let us know that pinball
designer Jon Norris wrote about a bunch of ideas for innovation in
classic pinball too. You can see his ideas at
[norrispinball.com](http://www.norrispinball.com). (Some are in the blog
and some are in the "Re-Inventing" section of his site.)

Lots of cool stuff there too!

## The future is bright!

One of the things we love most about pinball is that it's a real,
physical thing. Traditional arcade games have lost much of their
earnings power because everyone has a PS4 and 60" tv at home. But most
people don't have pinball machines at home. And even though there are
pinball apps for every device out there (which we LOVE, by the way), it
just doesn't compare to actually banging a metal ball around with some
mechanical levers.

Maybe it goes without saying, but we consider everything on this page to
be our "to do" list for the Mission Pinball Framework.

The best part is that the Mission Pinball Framework is highly modular,
so if you think some (or all) of these ideas are stupid, that's fine
with us! You can pick-and-choose the parts of MPF that you like and
throw out the rest.

Finally, we understand that a lot (ok, everything) we talked about here
only applies to new pinball machines moving forward. But what about the
hundreds of thousands of existing machines which are already in the
world based on 20-year old technology? We have some ideas for them
too... stay tuned!

Happy pinballing!

## Late 2016 Update

We originally wrote this vision when we started MPF back in 2014 (though
it's been updated since then). In late 2016, Jersey Jack Pinball
announced [Dialed In!](http://www.jerseyjackpinball.com/games/#dice), a
machine that has some of the features we wrote about in our vision. At
Expo, someone asked us if we were upset that Jersey Jack "ripped us
off". Our answer is quite the opposite. We're thrilled! We love these
ideas and love that they're making their way into pinball. (And frankly
we hope that Stern and everyone else does these too.)

Everything about Mission Pinball is open and available for sharing, use,
and ripping off. Take our ideas. Take our code. Copy our docs. We love
it all!
